you are a high-ranking military service
member deployed to Afghanistan you are
responsible for the lives of hundreds of
men and women and your base is under
attack
incoming mortar rounds are exploding all
around you struggling to see through the
dust and the smoke you do your best to
assist the wounded and then crawl to a
nearby bunker conscious but dazed by the
blasts you lay on your side and attempt
to process what has just happened as you
regain your vision you see a bloody face
staring back at you the image is
terrifying but you quickly come to
understand it's not real this vision
continues to visit you multiple times a
day and in your sleep you choose not to
tell anyone for fear of losing your job
or being seen as weak you give the
vision a name bloody face and bunker and
call it be fit for short
you keep be fit locked away in your mind
secretly haunting you for the next seven
years now close your eyes
can you see B fib if you can you're
beginning to see the face of the
invisible wounds of war commonly known
as post-traumatic stress disorder and
traumatic brain injury
well I can't say I have post-traumatic
stress disorder I've never been a
stranger to it when I was a little girl
I would visit my grandparents every
summer it was my grandfather who
introduced me to the effects of combat
on the psyche while my grandfather was
serving as a Marine and the
Korean War a bullet pierced his neck and
rendered him unable to cry out he
watched as a corpsman passed him over
declaring him a goner and then leaving
him to die years later after his
physical wounds had healed and he'd
returned home he rarely spoke of his
experiences in waking life but at night
I would hear him shouting obscenities
from his room down the hall in during
the day I would announce myself as I
entered the room careful not to startle
or agitate him he lived out the
remainder of his days isolated and
tight-lipped never finding a way to
express himself and I didn't yet have
the tools to guide him I wouldn't have a
name for my grandfather's condition
until I was in my 20s seeking a graduate
degree in art therapy I naturally
gravitated towards the study of trauma
and while sitting in class learning
about post-traumatic stress disorder or
PTSD for short my mission helps service
members who suffered like my grandfather
began to take form we've had various
names for post-traumatic stress
throughout the history of war
homesickness soldier's heart
shell-shocked thousand-yard stare for
instance and while I was pursuing my
degree a new war was raging and thanks
to modern body armor and military
vehicles service members were surviving
blast injuries they wouldn't have before
but the invisible wounds were reaching
new levels and this pushed military
doctors and researchers to try and truly
understand the effects the traumatic
brain injury or TBI and PTSD have on the
brain due to advances in technology and
neuro imaging we now know there's an
actual shut down in the Broca's or the
speech language area of the brain after
an individual experiences trauma this
physiological change or speechless
terror as it's often called
coupled with mental health stigma the
fear of being judged or misunderstood
possibly even removed from their current
duties has led to the invisible
struggles of our servicemen and women
generation after generation of veterans
have chosen not to talk about their
experiences in Suffern and solitude I
had my work cut out for me when I got my
first job as an art therapist at the
nation's largest Military Medical Center
Walter Reed after working for a few
years on a locked inpatient psychiatric
unit I eventually transferred to the
national intrepid center of excellence
Nyko which leads TBI care for
active-duty servicemembers now I
believed in art therapy but I was going
to have to convince servicemembers big
tough strong manly military men and some
women too to give art making as a
psychotherapeutic intervention a try the
results have been nothing short of
spectacular vivid symbolic artwork is
being created by our servicemen and
women and every work of art tells a
story we've observed that the process of
art therapy bypasses the speech-language
issue with the brain art making accesses
the same sensory areas of the brain that
encode trauma service members can use
the art making to work through their
experiences in a non-threatening way
they can then apply words to their
physical creations reintegrating the
left and the right hemispheres of the
brain now we've seen this can work with
all forms of art drawing painting
collage but what seems to have the most
impact is mask making finally these
invisible wounds don't just have a name
they have a face and when servicemembers
create these masks it allows them to
come to grips literally with their
trauma and it's amazing how often that
enables them to break through the trauma
start to heal remember B sub that was a
real experience for one of my patients
and when he created his mask he was able
to let go of that haunting image
initially it was a daunting process for
the service member but eventually he
began to think of B fib as the mask not
his internal wound and he would go to
levy session he'd hand me the mask and
say Melissa take care of him eventually
we placed v-fib in a box to further
contain him and when the service member
went to leave the Nyko he chose to leave
v-fib behind a year later he had only
seen beefed-up twice and both times
b-fit was smiling and the service member
didn't feel anxious now whenever that
service member is haunted by some
traumatic memory he continues to paint
every time he paints these disturbing
images he sees them less or not at all
philosophers have told us for thousands
of years that the power to create is
very closely linked to the power to
destroy now science is showing us that
the part of the brain that registers a
traumatic wound can be the part of the
brain where healing happens to an art
therapy is showing us how to make that
connection we asked one of our service
members to describe how mask-making
impacted his treatments and this is what
he had to say sort of just zone out into
the mask he's on his own out into the
drawing and for me it just released the
block so I was able to do it and then
when I looked at it after two days I
like holy crap here's the picture here's
the key here's the puzzle and then from
there it just soared I mean from there
my treatment just went you know out of
out of sight because they were like Curt
explain this explain this and for the
first time in 23 years I can actually
talk about stuff openly to like anybody
I could talk to you about it right now
if I wanted to because it unlocked it
it's just amazing and it allowed me to
put 23 years of PTSD
and the TV I stuffed together in one
place that has never happened before
sorry over the past five years we've had
over 1,000 masks made it's pretty
amazing isn't it yeah thank you I wish I
could have shared this process with my
grandfather but I know that he would be
thrilled that we are finding ways to
help today's and tomorrow's service
members heal and finding the resources
within them that they can call upon to
heal themselves thank you